Rebecca: So when you think about
somebody, let's say
they have a really busy work week
and then on the weekends
they catch up on all the errands
that they need to do.
They go to the dry cleaner,
they need to go buy a pair of shoes.
They have all of these things
that they need to do.
They don't think twice about
whether they're going to be able to do it.
It’s just a matter of whether they're
going to have enough time
to get all the things
that they want to do.
But what if these are
all of the things that you need to do,
all these errands you need to run,
but in order to run them,
you need somebody else to be with you
to make sure that
you're able to navigate safely.
[music plays]
Sarah: SSP, what that stands for is
Support Service Provider.
That term emerged quite a while ago,
I think it was from AADB
American Association of the DeafBlind.
And so what they did
was they recognized the need for an SSP
to accompany the DeafBlind individual
so they would have a sighted person
co-navigate with the DeafBlind individual.
Alice: Part of what they do
is also give you environmental cues.
Say we walk into a room,
they give you the landscape, so to speak.
Give you an idea who's there.
If you're looking for somebody
in particular, they can be honing in
to find that.
They can also give me haptic
cues on my back or on my shoulder.
For instance, if I'm talking to somebody
but they’re on their phone
not really listening,
I get to know all that too.
Rocky: The SSP is not there to enable a person.
They're not there to do things for them.
They're there to do things with them.
And so there are limitations
and restrictions on what an SSP
can do for them.
Sarah: The DeafBlind individual
would make a request.
Perhaps they're going to a doctor's office,
maybe they need to go
food shopping, go to the dentist,
or maybe they just want to go out
to the park for a walk.
Alice: I use them a lot actually,
for social stuff that I do.
You know, for instance,
if it's a bingo game
or we're doing Family Feud
and they keep me on point
so I know who's saying what, when
and what's going on
in the chat window when I can only monitor
one thing at a time.
So they also can help with phone calls
and lots of other things.
So that role is pretty intense.
My first SSP went surfing with me,
probably laughed at me for a while
because she didn't think
I was serious until I was like,
“yeah, I'm really going surfing.
How are we going to play this?”
And, you know, that took a lot of practice
and stuff, but it's client led,
you know, they don't do anything
that we don't ask them to.
They give you as much
information as I want
and as much detail as I need.
And if I'm actually holding my own,
they can also step back and just let it go.
Renee: You know, there's new vocabulary
coming out for the SSP role.
There's a new term called “co...”
Oh, I hope I get this right, “navigator.”
I don't know if
I spelled that correctly,
but basically they provide support.
They provide support
and services that are needed
by DeafBlind individuals,
and these SSPs or co-navigators,
have the skills.
They can sign with sign language
and they provide environmental
information of what's around.
For example, if I'm going into a store
and I'd like to go shopping,
I'll get everything in my cart
and I’ll go to the cashier
and the cashier will say, okay, here's
how much this is going to cost.
The SSP tells me that. I pull out my card
put the pin number in the machine.
So it's really like communication facilitation.
Sarah: I do want to take a moment here
to explain the difference
between SSP and interpreter
because they are two completely different roles.
An SSP is a person that
provides visual information.
That's what their role is.
While an interpreter is there
to provide access to communication.
So a lot of people think, Oh, well,
the SSP, they can interpret too.
And so then they ask the SSP to interpret.
Please do not do that. That is not their role.
[music plays]
Rocky: There are two categories of SSPs.
So there are personally trained SSPs
and then there are professionally trained SSPs.
Professionally trained SSPs,
they work through a particular program
and they are trained in what they are
and are not allowed to do.
And they function as a professional
in a professional role,
and they are there to empower
the individual that they’re working with.
A personal SSP would be no different than me,
for example, having a family member
or a close friend going with me to a store
or driving me to a different place
to assist me in completing a task
such as reading my mail or going
grocery shopping
or even facilitating communication.
Sarah: Today, there are
some states out there
that do have SSP services and programs,
but not a lot of states.
So it would be nice if all of the states
in the country recognized
the need just to have
co-navigators available as a resource.
Rocky: For anyone who is DeafBlind
You can reach out
and see if your state has a program.
Some states, unfortunately, do not.
But there are other services that you can
access if you don't have access to that.
And as long as they're used correctly,
they can be very fulfilling
for an individual
who is DeafBlind to gain access.
Renee: As a DeafBlind individual,
if we’re going into a store with no SSP,
there's no communication for us.
How would I be able to shop?
I can't do that independently
without someone like an SSP by my side
I have to have that.
It’s much more of an exciting opportunity
for us to have those services.
I cannot wait until they really start.
[music ends]